# ET Retrieval
Evapotranspiration (ET) is comprised of evaporation and transpiration measurements for a total water and energy flux exchange from the land surface to the atmosphere. Over a specific region, it can be used as an indicator of the ecosystem’s health, hydrologic cycle, agricultural processes, and water dynamics. Because ET is a process driven by energy exchanges between the surface and the atmosphere the main inputs for ET retrieval algorithms are daily surface and air temperatures, both short and longwave radiation, wind speed and height, and relative humidity. In Colorado, the ET measurements can be used for vegetation health and drought indices as well as irrigation schedules and agriculture planning (Allen et al., 1998). Actual ET is the calculation of ET from the product of the reference and fractional ET (Senay et al., 2013). If ET is happening at a rate faster than water is being replenished to the soils, precipitation rate, then the soils and the vegetation will dry out. Depending on the soil’s ability to hold water the actual ET is typically equal to the precipitation of the region unless the area is irrigated like the eastern plain of this projects study region, the state of Colorado. To retrieve the actual ET over the study region the Simplified Surface Energy Balance (SSEB) parametrization from Senay et al. (2007) is used for its higher efficiency over alternative formulas like the Bowen ratio energy balance and the eddy correlation which focus on requirements like terrain topography, and the Penman-Monteith combination equations and the Priestly-Taylor approximation which are estimation by meteorological variables (Pauwels & Samson, 2006). The SSEB is a thermal approach for ET estimates utilizing the land surface temperature for greater accuracy of actual ET. The operational SSEB or SSEBop builds off the original SSEB algorithm enhanced by Senay et al. (2011a) to account for elevation and latitude changes, a factor necessary for retrieval over the Rocky Mountains. This study aims to retrieve and analyze the temporal trend of 30-meter ET over the Colorado region from the years 2000-2018 derived from USGS Landsat data and analyze the spatial and temporal pattern of the USGS actual ET.
